From vickery@.MISSING-HOST-NAME. Mon Dec  1 19:33:20 2003
Date: Thu, 16 Oct 2003 15:15:26 -0400 (EDT)
From: Christopher Vickery <vickery>
To: vickery
Subject: CS-345: Lab Update and Project Proposals

                                 Thursday October 16, 2003
Dog Emma:

Two things:

  1.  I've posted an addendum to the handout for Laboratory V.  There
  are no changes to the version that was handed out during the lab
  session, but I wrote a description of how you can connect the
  Waveform Analyzer instead of an oscilloscope to your program to
  verify that your program's pulse timings are correct.  There is a
  link to the addendum on the course web page.

  2.  I had originally said your project proposals would be due this
  week, forgetting that there was no lecture meeting until next
  Monday.  So here is information about that:

    Your group is to submit a written project proposal by 
    Wednesday the 22nd that consists of the following information:

      * Title
      * Names of group members
      * Description of what the completed project will be/do.  This
        is to be a brief, just a sentence or two.
      * Rationale for the project.  Tell why this seems like an
        project to implement on the RC200E.  Be sure to mention what
        features of the RC200E your project will make use of.
      * Development plan.  This is just a list of the subgoals you 
        plan to go through to complete the project.  For example,
        "Learn how to read an image from the camera" might be one of
        the subgoals of an image processing project.  Try to arrange
        these subgoals in a logical order, and tell how they might be
        partitioned among the members of the group to facilitate
        parallel development effort.

    Don't agonize over this document; this one is only a draft.  I'll
    comment on it and give you feedback to help you come up with a
    good plan.  If you are not sure exactly what you want to do, you
    can just tell what sort of thing sounds interesting and/or ask
    questions here.  You may submit your plan early and I will give
    you my feedback as quickly as I can.  The idea is to get started
    on this so you can get to work on the project as soon as
    possible.

    My plan is to stop assigning laboratory exercises and to devote
    all lab time to your work on your projects for the remainder of
    the semester.  I'll be checking your progress each week.

    Here are some features of the RC-200E we haven't explored yet, any
    of which might be useful and/or interesting as you think about
    what you will be doing:

      * Touchscreen and mouse input
      * Audio and Video I/O
      * Bluetooth
      * Ethernet
      * SmartMedia I/O
      * 8 MB of RAM
      * RS-232 Interface (modem/terminal connection)
      * Microprocessor (we are licensed to use Xilinx' "MicroBlaze"
        CPU, which is an entire 32-bit RISC CPU that can be loaded
        into the FPGA and runs programs written in C.  Interfacing
        some of the RC200E peripherals to this CPU would be an
        "interesting" project.

  Dr. Vickery
